How's things out in California?
Weather holding up out there?
Weather looks nice.
It's getting a little windy and a little cooler.
Yeah, it's getting kind of crisp here too.
Okay, I want to ask you a few questions about things in general
and about some of the specific works too maybe.
First of all, let me make sure that my tape machine is rolling
in yonder.
Are we rolling?
Okay. First of all, do you classify yourself
as a hard science writer with stories for the most part having a strong scientific base?
If you've got the class of Jaime, that's where I sit.
Yes, I would.
I suppose all writers resist classification as best they can.
I do other things too.
Fantasy, considerable fantasy, a great deal more hard science fiction,
not much in the way of soft science fiction.
Articles, speeches, I'm the guy who did a study of the medical problems of breeding
Kryptonians called Man of Steel, Woman of Kleenex.
And I just published the only venture I've ever made into economics,
a method which would also solve the problem of nuclear waste disposal.
Maybe you saw it in Omni.
Mm-hmm.
The idea is to turn the nuclear waste into coins.
Healthy economy is one in which the money circulates fast.
Uh-huh.
You mentioned that you didn't write much of the soft science fiction.
Do you think that the new wave is passed back to strong science-oriented stories?
Or is that a good thing?
Yes, I do.
However, the new wave was very good to me.
Uh, when I was first getting started, I was the only new hard science fiction writer.
The new wave is a very persuasive thing,
and very easy to use to justify bad stories.
I think that's what killed it.
Not that increased characterization and experiments with typography and story format
are a bad thing in themselves, but it's so easy to use new wave to justify a bad story.
It was bound to go out.
How did you begin writing science fiction?
Have you always been a science fiction reader or fan?
Yes.
And presently, I found I was making up, I was daydreaming stories that seemed worth writing.
Did you tell the stories before you began to get to where you could write
them down?
Yes, I've been a storyteller all my life.
You must have a large, I know you have a large fan group.
Do they keep in contact with you regularly?
Do you write ever for the fans or do you just write what you want to write?
I mostly write for myself, for an imaginary reader who resembles me a great deal.
Only he needs things explained to him.
Beyond that, I sell it where I can and pick up readers where I can.
I might ask you here a little bit about the known space series.
How did that begin?
How did you get involved in a future history?
Well, there had been future histories around.
Uh, Poole Anderson's and uh, Robert Heinlein's.
And I tell you, I guess we each evolved the idea somewhat independently.
And the idea is that if you carved out a consistent, workable future,
it seems a shame to waste it on one story.
You put in the background because you want the uh, you want the
background of a story to seem bigger than it is.
So there are things that are simply unexplained.
And if you think of more to say on a given subject, why you go with it?
And if you think of a story that fits into the background of a previous story,
it allows you to elaborate on that background.
You sometimes you fall in love with the background.
And presently you've got a bunch of stories that link.
You said that your future history was finished when you wrote the Ringworld Engineers and the
afterwards. Uh, is that still true? And if so, why?
Oh, I've given up saying that the uh, that the known space series is dating.
There's just no point in it.
I've written five books worth of known space stories since I said that.
And besides that, I have no doubt that I'll come up with stories said in the gill in gilly arms
time. I like writing science fiction detective stories.
It just, it's just hard work. I do not have a detective story in my head.
It'll have to emerge.
But that's the beginning of known space and I'll continue to work with it where it looks like fun.
You've written, like you said, some science, uh, detective stories and also some other areas.
Is there any area or any subject that can't be done for science fiction that you think of?
No, I can't think of any. I guess I go along with the idea that there are these interlocked
circles to represent various areas of fiction and they all swim in the sea of fantasy.
Science fiction probably includes the entire portion of fantasy that is possible.
And uh, mainstream would be somewhere in there and nurse novels would be somewhere in that.
You follow?
There would be no subject you could treat in English that couldn't be treated in a science
fiction format except fantasy and that would be treated in a fantasy format.
I see. I understand that in Ring World that's, well first of all let me ask you, how did,
how did the Ring World itself, the concept come about?
Oh, I ran across the concept Dyson's spear. Dyson the mathematician came up with the concept
Dyson's shell and he was misunderstood to some extent. So presently I ran across an article
about Dyson's spear. A picture that is a golf ball 93 million miles in radius with a sun at the
center and gravity generators all around the outside so he would live on the inside, terraform
with uh oceans and soil and air. I ran across that and I didn't like it. I thought it could be
improved and I wound up with the Ring World. I believe you mentioned somewhere that uh,
Mr. Dyson or someone had thought that maybe a whole bunch of small Ring Worlds would be
superior to the one large one. That was Freeman Dyson's reaction. I believe I gave an acceptable
answer to that in the Ring World engineers but in general he'd be right. It's just that the
Ring World engineers in particular are people who like dependable weapons of huge size.
I understand that some fans pointed out errors in the Ring World, the original novel.
Do you know what were the basic errors and how did you correct them through that?
Column errors and elaborations because some of them don't really fit the error thing. It's just
something that hadn't gotten into the original book. For instance, I suspect that the Ring World
was unstable and I suspected you'd eat attitude jets. I was sure that the Ring World was spinning
fast enough to permit Lysard Ramjet to be used as attitude jets which means you don't have a
fuel problem at all. You're burning the solar wind. But uh, rapidly some MIT people demonstrated
that the Ring World was unstable and they were chanting it in the halls at the next Worldcon.
The Ring World is unstable. The Ring World is unstable. It still took about seven years for
anyone to figure out the exact numbers for the instability and they are horrifying. The Ring
World, a major solar flare would have the Ring World grinding against its sun in five years.
Well, I worked it into a plot. That was one elaboration or error. Another just can't be
correct. It seems that there's too much twilight with the shadow squares set up the way I have them
set up. You get too much of neither day nor night but twilight. Uh, half the sun showing,
part of the sun showing. The shadow squares ought to be set up with about five big shadow squares
moving in a retrograde world. That way you get day and night setting much faster when it when it sits.
Terminate, terminate or line moves like a bat out of hell. It's still a little fuzzy,
which doesn't matter. Uh, third point, somebody pointed out that the tensile strength necessary
to hold the Ring World together is on the order of the tensile strength of an atomic nucleus.
It's the super strong force. Okay, I can live with that. I can postulate that. I knew
this grip would have to be stronger than any normal material already.
Fourth point, some high school class in Florida got to work on the Ring World.
And their conclusion was that the Ring World's worst problem is that on the top soil would wind
up in the oceans in about 3,000 years. There are no earthquakes on the Ring World. No, not in building
forces. Okay, uh, that's a tough one. I set up a spill pipe system that runs the top, that runs the
sea bottom muck from the sea bottoms under the Ring World and up over the edge of the Ring Rim Wall.
That even allows you some, uh, some mines accumulation of useful metals.
What else? Checking in my head. I find, uh, Frank Gisperic's suggestion that a machine
building culture on the Ring World, which reached our level, wouldn't have any petroleum products to
use. They would wind up using alcohol, uh, where we use gasoline. And fine, I can live with that.
As a matter of fact, the sludge from, uh, making alcohol for automobiles, the sludge can be used
to make plastics, maybe plastic like substances, maybe. Uh, the chemicals are adjusted as elaborate,
as those, as the residues from petroleum. Um, it's quenching. Yeah. What else?
Still checking in my head. I pick up on other things I can't use, such as Dan Alderson's solar
system, which involves four Ring World. He's got three Ring Worlds about the size of mine,
rotating orthogonally on frictionless bearings. And the fourth Ring World is, uh, about the size
of the orbit of Jupiter and inhabited by mesquilinites. Mesquilinites derived from a novel by Hal
Klemann, mission of gravity and mesquilinites require, uh, cold temperatures about those of the
orbit of Jupiter as opposed to Jupiter, which has an internal heat source, cold temperatures and
heavy gravity. So there, so his fourth Ring World is the size of the orbit of Jupiter and spinning
like a bat out of hell. I had it figured out that if, if they spun that Ring World any faster,
it would get nearer the speed of light and contract.
Dan says I've misunderstood relativity. It would not contract. Okay. I still haven't figured out. Why not?
Well, you obviously enjoy playing the game as Hal Klemann calls it between your own scientific
knowledge and that of your readers and peers. Absolutely. I incorporated everything that sounded
good that I could use in redesign, in elaborating the design of the Ring World.
What do you think about the current ideas being proposed by Gerardo Neal and others for space
habitats? I think they are grandiose and I certainly wouldn't stop him, but the space program seems to
have fallen flat on its face at this point. We will have trouble reaching the moon again,
getting back to the moon is, is as big a problem as we can face.
I resent having to say that, but I believe it's true.
How do you go about constructing aliens with particular reference to the moats, to the moaties?
Were you influenced by anyone in that area?
The moaties were, no, not in that case. In that case, I had the idea that I was following a
progression with a protozoan, with an amoeba. You get radio symmetry inside and out. Move up a
goodly distance and you find starfishes with radio symmetry on the outside and bilateral
symmetry on the inside. Move up a little further, you find flat worms and worms of all
stance at the level of bilateral symmetry inside and out. Go as far as a human, you find bilateral
symmetry on the outside and no symmetry, well, half symmetrical on the inside. The lungs look
symmetrical, the kidneys look symmetrical, the intestines look like somebody dropped a plate
of spaghetti. I've tried to move on to the next step, bilaterally unsymmetrical on the outside
and I got the original moatie, which was the engineer for them. But I always design aliens
for themselves. I almost never design an alien to match a story. The story,
some story will eventually include the alien. The alien stands for itself.
How did you come up with the concept of cowardice embodied in the Pearson's puppeteers?
Well, we just seemed an idea worth exploring.
I think one of the outstanding aspects on the moaties, back to them for a minute, was the
non-use of standardized parts and machines. They built whatever they needed on the spot.
Do you recall what made you think along those lines?
I was just playing along. I was just playing with ideas at that point and that one seemed like a
fun one. It also seemed likely enough if you've got a critter with not much intelligence accepting
the direction of toolmaking and tool altering. Then why not? The thing has to keep testing its
ability or it will lose it. It might as well be designing something every time it needs a specific
machine. One other master can always stop it and have it producing as if by assembly line. If a
master needs a lot of something fast.
One other specific question and this jumps back to Ringworld a moment was concerning the tea,
the brown gene. Was this more or less a story gimmick or were you extrapolating on the
evolution of humanity there?
Oh partly that and partly you've got to remember the time I was writing. I was damn sick and tired
of psychic powers showing up in stories. I did not believe in psychic powers at that time. I've been
told they look pretty good now but at the time I can see the tea, the brown gene as being the
ultimate psychic power which you may interpret either as luck or as author control. And in that
sense it was something of a put on except that I can believe almost anything while I'm writing the
story and I am able to extrapolate. So if Tila Brown is lucky certain things emerge and if she's
just a statistical fool then something else emerges and that's that people will interpret
anything that happens to her as luck. Defending their preconception.
What do you do you consider to be your your best work or your favorite work?
No I couldn't tell you that. There is no way I can name a favorite work. The whole my career is
progression for one thing. I take any novel or any important short story even out of that
progression and it wanders away in a different direction. So I don't think I have a favorite
story but but I suppose I can name inconstant moon which is virtually the only strictly love story
I haven't written. And I suppose I could name lucifer's hammer which made me the most money.
So a modian god's eye made me that. I suppose I could name uh oh man of steel woman of queen
eggs which has gotten me the most laughs I suppose. Everybody seems to have read it. Those who haven't
heard about it a cocktail party or what? Jerry Pornel and I just recently wrote
the last 10 minutes for a movie that had a good 90 minutes followed by a bad last 10 minutes.
And the last I've heard is they're not going to make the movie which is a dirty shame.
That is they're not going to make the last 10 minutes hour away. They're going to fiddle with
what they've got. And that's a really dirty shame. What they've got is garbage. I really hope they
use that last 10 minutes and if they do I will get considerable enjoyment out of that and that'll
be my favorite. You name it. You mentioned your collaboration with with Jerry Pornel. Which do
you prefer writing alone or with another person like that? I prefer variety. In fact I even prefer
a variety of my collaborators. I just finished a novel with a Stephen Barnes and we're starting
another a short one and Jerry and I are starting another almost instantly. The novel about uh
well we designed an alien that could invade the earth and also would want
it's tough to get an alien whom you could believe would want to invade the earth from another star
considering the distances involved and the energy involved and the penalties for failure
and the lack of the unlikelihood that it will do your home planet any good if you conquer
something that is six light years away. Anyway we've designed one and we will be writing a novel
about that. When you collaborate with someone like that who does what job do you get that get
involved with uh being hard to decide who does what? Hard sometimes but it always resolves.
The question is who is more who is most qualified to write a given scene that we have both decided
needs writing okay uh before we start we have the novel all laid out we know what's going in
virtually everywhere and if we don't it feels like we do and if we find out we don't we elaborate as
we get to that section. Okay the next question is who is qualified to write a given scene and
sometimes it's obvious if we're dealing with a madman he's mine if we're dealing with military
operations it's Jerry's aliens are generally mine politics is generally Jerry's knowledge of history
generally Jerry's and a real evil son of a bitch Jerry usually creates him and I usually run with him
afterwards because Jerry has a lot of textbooks on psychology and uh PhD in psychology for that
matter sorry doctorate in psychology and when he's created a really evil son of a bitch he just
hates him too much to work with him I can easily do something Horace Barryworth went that way and
the rapist in Lucifer's hammer and a couple of the characters in Inferno.
Understand that both uh you and Mr. Bernal use uh word processors how does that aid in your writing?
It makes first draft a little faster but it makes corrections enormously faster.
You get a more polished novel when I'm using a word processor.
It's polishing is just like sinking into the machine almost.
Uh the word processor behaves like a magic typewriter it does everything you would want
a typewriter to do only it can't it can't erase whole blocks of printed at time and then straighten
up the page so it looks like you never made any corrections but a word processor can do just that
and move blocks up and down the page up and down the manuscript.
That's a what more grandiose question I suppose uh what do you think is the future of science fiction
is is fantasy taking over or do you see foresee a lot of hard science fiction to come?
Hard to say for one thing uh writers in general don't take orders where the damn
science the science fiction field is galloping off in all directions just as it always has
and the reader will make the final decision in most cases
what will be successful it'll depend on who buys what books
that's always been true.
I know that some of your works were involved uh with the animated Star Trek episodes a few years
back uh how did that start did you know? Oh it went like this uh they were gonna start a
Star Trek cartoon and uh the lady who was story editor got me involved
I tried to give them a story that involved a mini black hole and uh an outsider ship
you remember the outsiders from known space? Certainly. I had the idea that Star Trek had
been using many rubber suits for so long that they wouldn't realize how much more freedom they had
with the animated version that turns out not to be the case they had some very good agents in there
but uh that story turned out to be a little over over the heads of their intended audience
so I want it it did incidentally wind up as as the first version of the uh last part of a story
called the border of the soul so I eventually wound up meeting Gene Roddenberry and he wound up
suggesting why don't I take a story called the soft weapon and turn it into a start into a Star Trek version
and I did that and called it the slave weapon and fine they eventually made a cartoon out of it
they also sold the right to turn that cartoon script into a story they sold that to Ballantyne
I got mildly upset the president of the civil who was Jerry Pornel at the time got seriously upset
and started making as many waves as he could and what eventually happened was that they sent me a
dollar for uh a check for two dollars and something something sent somewhere between two and three dollars
and Jerry I don't know where the negotiations went but Jerry wound up saying okay that defends
the principle of the thing uh we'll ask for more next time and that's that for some years but by then
I had written to Ballantyne and gotten a letter from Betty Ballantyne saying hey we won't ever use it
we promise we see you're upset we promise we won't ever do anything with this
uh a little later the Ballantyne got out of the uh Ballantyne books business and and into the business
of printing uh illustrated stuff and Judy Lindell Ray wound up in charge and presently
presently I'm being offered two thousand bucks as advisors to Alan Dean Foster who will turn my
script into a novel and I said fine when I what I really meant was acceptable
two months later I've got a letter from Judy Lind dropping the price to five hundred and I pulled my
top I said a I won't collaborate with with uh you or Alan on anything of the kind and B you may not
use anything from known space except what's in the script and that is the way it happened Alan did
not use anything except what was in the script which involves Cindy and the history of the flavors
and the stasis box are there any uh plans for motion picture television versus any of your
works in the future yes there are uh I just don't know how far they are going to go but there is
there is a group that owns an option on on death by ecstasy and a guy who owns an option on the modian
guys eye and let's see I've got a friend trying to get public broadcasting system to make a tv
version of lucid of uh in constant moon which would be nice all of which would be nice
are there any uh contemporary science fiction writers that that you particularly admire or
consider good writers yes agreed many and in particular you'd like to mention sure there's
little glinn john varley pool angerson uh jerry pornell uh how far do we go with this I like the
old ones and I like the new ones I like about half of uh following elizabeth's stories
which is a better record than many writers have I like a few of phil dick stories and I will probably
buy the uh last of the door side books by gordy dixon in fact it's damn certain I will read it I'll buy
it if it doesn't come free I get swamped in free books you know uh
I'm a period anthony fan I don't know how numerous we period anthony fans are I like the puzzles in
his books and his books are always jammed with puzzles and new ways of thinking and so forth
yeah it's a spell for chameleon stuff is great too love that um that really runs about the gamut of
my questions here uh well one last question I ask you uh I don't suppose those uh puppeteers ever
sneaked you the formula for that general products sold did they no I don't have the formula for
general products though but I I have reason to suspect that there are puppeteers on earth
look at the characteristics uh forget the shape they must be masters of biology that to hide that
peculiar three-legged two-headed shape but consider their characteristics they are cowards
that is they want everything utterly safe no corners on anything everything is soft surfaces
around the puppeteer world they don't even keep their world near a sun regarding it as a runaway
fusion reactor which of course it is so uh desperate regard for safety they uh plus
an urge to meddle in the lifestyles of other species driving urge to meddle with with uh
practically no restraints attached what does that remind you of it seems nearly certain to me that
Ralph Nader is a fierceness puppeteer that's great is there anything uh anything else that you might
have that you'd like to say to some of our radio listeners here that uh would be interested in
fiction
yeah it's uh been a real pleasure speaking with you tonight I appreciate very much your time
on this. That's okay, I love talking about myself.
I get a lot of radars left. Well we appreciate it. We enjoy hearing you talk too
and thank you again for your time. We'll try to get a copy of this
tape to you as soon as we can get it edited around.
Hello. Okay thank you very much. That's me on this side. Okay you're cutting this out.
Okay go ahead. I'll take it on this side. There we go.
I haven't heard yet. Yeah I just...
Now I've got it on here. Go ahead and hang up, both. Okay, go ahead.
I got it. Mr. Niven, this is David Carson again. Could I ask you one question?
Mr. Niven? Hello?
Mr. Niven, we lost you on the phone there. This is David Carson at the Science Fiction
Radio Show again. I was just calling to see if you still had time to talk with our
sci-fi class this Thursday, November the 6th.
Just a second. If you've asked me before, I probably noted it down.
No, I haven't noted it down. That space is clear. What time do you want?
We'll call you almost the same time, about five minutes, about 15 minutes
after five year time. The class starts at seven o'clock our time, so that
should be perfect. It'll be five fifteen year time.
Okay. Listen, we certainly do appreciate this and
we'll be sending you a copy of the completed tape and we'll be putting one
on file with the Science Fiction Research Association.
Okay, good. Yeah, we just joined up with them about a week or two ago and
they sent us a little request and went all of our tapes, so we decided we'd
send them some non-broadcast copies of the tapes to them.
Good enough.
Uh, excuse me, that was Thursday the 6th of November?
Yes, sir. Good. I have this nasty habit of putting it down on the wrong day.
Yeah. Okay. Okay, the class has about, depending upon how alert they are,
they'll be between 10 to 20 people there and we won't take up more than about
30 minutes of your time. Okay. They're reading your novel
Ringworld for part of the class and that's what they'll be asking you
questions on. Okay. There are mostly, they're just
some average readers, they read a lot of stuff and there are a few
ardent science fiction fans who will try and restrain.
Okay.